Education

April 21, 2025
What is Emergency Medical Services?

Emergency Medical Services (EMS) is a critical component of the healthcare system, providing rapid, on-site care in emergencies such as car accidents, cardiac events, medical emergencies, and disasters. EMS professionals, including paramedics and emergency medical responders, provide first aid, stabilize patients, and transport them to medical facilities for further treatment.

At the Emergency Services Association, we aim to build an inclusive community for people interested in emergency services. Our organization is focused on providing educational content, career exploration opportunities, and collaborative discussions to enhance knowledge and skills in emergency services.

If you are interested in getting involved, please complete the form linked on our website. While we are currently focusing on educational initiatives and other channels, we are excited to build opportunities for engagement as the organization grows. We look forward to your participation.
 

April 28, 2025
What is the Role of Paramedics in EMS?

Paramedics are a critical part of the EMS system, responding to emergencies ranging from accidents to cardiac arrests. Trained to provide advanced medical care, paramedics stabilize patients on-site and transport them to medical facilities for further treatment.

Their work requires extensive training in advanced first aid, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, medication administration, and the use of life-saving equipment. Paramedics also collaborate closely with other emergency services, such as fire and police departments, to ensure a comprehensive emergency response.

As part of our mission at the Emergency Services Association, we aim to educate, explore, and collaborate on EMS career paths, including paramedicine.

If you are passionate about pursuing a career in emergency services, we invite you to join our community and explore opportunities for development. Complete the form through the link on our website to get involved.

For more information, please contact us. We look forward to your participation.

Return to Home.


May 26, 2025

What is the Role of a Nurse in EMS?

EMS has a role for a nurse and that can start as soon as they are informed about an emergency by dispatch, or a little later in time by paramedics who are responding to an emergency in the field. In both cases, the nurse can start the preparation of receiving the patient and starting the appropriate treatment for the patient. Patients can also benefit from the nurse as the nurse can communicate with paramedics or volunteer responders who are providing the treatment to assist with the treatment, before the patient arrives to the hospital, after arrival or a short period of time before patient arrival the nurse can communicate with the doctor to be ready for the patient and ensure a good transition of care and ongoing patient care.

We apologize as this educational post was published late due to an emergency. The Emergency Services Association is an inclusive non-profit organization that fosters collaborations between different entities like faculties and other organizations in order to provide education, research opportunities, and speaker sessions in the field of emergency services. If you would like to get involved, please visit our website and complete the form to join. We look forward to your participation.


June 2, 2025

What is the Role of a Doctor in EMS?

EMS has a role for a doctor and that can start outside the hospital in the form of a bystander who treats the patient in the field, similar to a paramedic, or he or she may guide the prehospital provider, including paramedics or volunteer responders, who is providing care and may transfer the care of the patient directly to the doctor in the field, provided the doctor has identification to confirm their identity and reassure the prehospital care provider that he or she can transfer care to the doctor in a good way.

Way before this scenario a more probable scenario is that the doctor will generally operate in the hospital, typically in the Emergency Department (ED), and directly assume care of the patient after the paramedic transfers care to the nurse for registration and triage, or the patient can directly bring themselves to the ED of a hospital in order to get registered and triaged by a nurse, and subsequently see a doctor in the hospital based on the chart of the patient that is created by the nurse. Nurses in the ED communicate the initial assessment and priority of the patient, which determines the ED doctor who sees the patient and conducts a higher level of treatment and care.

Care is a good way that we at the Emergency Services Association do our work and collaborate among ourselves in order to create an inclusive environment for collaboration between faculties and organizations in the field of Emergency Services. The field of Emergency Services is good because we encourage education and research in this field and are currently looking for good people who are passionate about making this field more good. Making this field more good can start by filling out the form on our website in order to improve the Emergency Services.


June 9, 2025

What is the Role of an Ambulance in EMS?

EMS has a role for an ambulance and that is to enable paramedics or volunteer first responders to arrive at the scene of an emergency quickly and then pickup the patient and transport the patient to a hospital. Hospital staff can communicate with the responders in the ambulance via radio in order to determine the severity of the patient that they are expecting to receive at the hospital, or even provide guidance to the responders who are transporting the patient. It seems like when the ambulance is not transporting a patient it can be utilized as a vehicle to transport goods like medical equipment. Equipment like the AED (Automatic External Defibrillator), stretchers, vital signs equipment, and IV equipment are available alongside lights and sirens in order to transport the patient to a hospital in a good way.

Way of the Emergency Services Association is that it is an inclusive organization that is not-for-profit, and it fosters a collaborative environment amongst different kinds of organizations for research, discussions, and speaker sessions in order to improve the field of emergency services. Services work is good and if you are interested to join, visit our website and complete the form because we look forward to your participation.


June 16, 2025

What is the Role of an ED in EMS?

EMS has a role for an ED or Emergency Department which can be at a hospital, and that is to be an efficient place for the patients who are in the hospital due to an emergency. Emergency departments can be designed in a way that can accommodate high priority and low priority patients, in areas known as Resus, which is Resuscitation, or ATC, which is Ambulatory Treatment Care. Care for young people or pediatrics, old people or geriatrics is also offered in specific areas of the ED also with many other areas between the low priority and high priority range and specialized areas, such as mental health.

Health is the current theme of the Emergency Services Association, which is an inclusive organization that fosters collaborations between different entities, like faculties and organizations, in order to improve education and research in the area of Emergency Services. Services are good and if you would like to join the Emergency Services Association, please visit our website and complete the form, or if you would like to make inquiries, contact us because it is good.


June 23, 2025

What is a Patient Care Record in EMS?

EMS has an important function for the Patient Care Record (PCR) and that is to serve as a way to record or document the interaction of the responder with the patient in the field. Field interaction with the patient can be done by varying levels of responders, ranging from volunteers to paramedics, and the complexity of the system will vary depending on the level of the responders. Responders who are volunteers have a simpler PCR to complete, which includes multiple sections. Sections can start with the general information section that contains information like the date, time and location. Location information can be followed by a section about patient consent and refusal of treatment, which would come before some personal information about the patient, such as name, address, date of birth, phone number, allergies, medication, and past medical history.

History can be followed by a section for initial assessment where location of the injury and vital signs, such as pulse and respirations, are indicated on the PCR. The PCR can also include a section for specifying the treatment that was given to the patient, including details like the time, description and outcome of each treatment, which includes cardiac arrest treatment, that was delivered to the patients. Patients can also benefit from another section which records follow-up vital signs to check the stability of the patient before having a section about discharge and the signatures of the responders who treated the patients and completed the PCR.

PCR is an example of an emergency health system that is going to be researched at the Emergency Services Association, which is a not-for-profit and inclusive organization dedicated to fostering a good environment for education and research in the area of emergency services. Services, such as police, fire, medical, and the military are welcome to participate and join our community in order to improve the emergency services by completing the join form on our website.


June 30, 2025

What is a Medical Bag in EMS?

EMS has a medical bag and that is to serve as an entity that contains the medical equipment that is needed to treat people in the field. Field work does not need a big medical bag as a simple first aid kit can be sufficient to treat simple injuries, such as cuts and bruises, with the help of equipment like dressings, bandages, and cold packs. Packs of ice can be a part of first aid kits, which can be thought of as small medical bags, which are utilized by responders at the lower end of the chain of command such as first aiders. First aiders can have a higher level of training, such as a Medical First Responders or Emergency Medical Responders, and this is associated with a medical bag that includes more equipment in order to reflect their level of training as well as provide them the tools to treat different kinds of problems that people may encounter. Encountering additional equipment means there can be splints, AED machines, blood pressure equipment, other vital signs equipment, stethoscope, scissors, light devices to check pupils, equipment to check the oxygen levels in the blood and the pulse, and other medical equipment.

Medical equipment is important to us at the Emergency Services Association because we intend to conduct research in order to improve it by considering it as one of many emergency health systems. Systems of this kind and others are good because they allow us to share education and research in the area of emergency services and achieve our goals. Our goals and your goals as a prospective contributor to our organisation can be aligned if you can complete the join form our website in order to contribute to the Emergency Services Association.


July 7, 2025

What are Emergency Health Systems?

Emergency Health Systems or EHS include systems that are associated with emergency and health and they are vast in number as they can include almost any system ranging from paper-based forms to physical, computer and electronic based equipment. Equipment or rather the systems that will be focused in this education post is the Patient Care Record (PCR) system and the medical bag system because these systems can be considered to be high-priority systems from a first-principles lens, which is the perspective of the volunteer responder. Responders who work as a volunteer are low in the chain of command compared to other prehospital care responders, such as a paramedic. Paramedic professionals utilize similar systems, such as the PCR and the medical bag, and these systems are more complex because they reflect a higher level of training that is associated with a paramedic as opposed to a volunteer.

A volunteer relies on both the PCR and the medical bag in order to make good decisions in the field. Field systems, like the PCR, are good because volunteer first responders often document patient information using paper-based PCRs, and information that is recorded includes general contact information, allergies, medication, past medical history, consent, patient assessment, vitals signs, refusal of treatment, treatment, follow-up vitals signs, disposition summary, and signatures of the volunteer responders. Responders also utilize the medical bag system in order to obtain medical equipment, which includes dressings, bandages, splints, stethoscope, AED, airway equipment, breathing equipment, circulation equipment, and vital signs equipment. Equipment of this kind is important to provide good first aid to people.

People are an integral part of the Emergency Services Association, which is an inclusive organization that fosters collaborations between organizations and faculties in order to improve education and research in the area of emergency services. Services work is good because it offers people an opportunity to work in many different domains, such as medical, police, fire, and the military. The military and the other branches of emergency services can benefit from our work, and for anyone who would like to contribute, complete the form by visiting our website.


July 14, 2025

What is the Importance of Blood in EMS?

The importance of blood in EMS is high because it is a vital part of almost all living beings. Beings of the human kind in particular find blood to be of most importance because majority of the liquid within the human body includes blood. Blood is important to the human body because it acts as a vessel for transporting and excreting food in the form of nutrients and waste from the cells in the body. The body of initiative for blood in the local communities in Canada, for example, that is also a non-profit organization and is a designated charity is the Canadian Blood Services (CBS), which has a needs based goal of increasing blood donations from 1.5% to 3.0% in order to reach a total of one million donations in the future.

The future can be unknown and you may never know when you may need blood for events, such as an accident, injury, illness, throughout pregnancy or at the time of delivery. Delivery of emergency services often involves meeting people on the worst day of their lives, and responders facilitate bringing them for further medical treatment at a hospital where they often may need to access life-saving blood and blood products, and this is why what is done at the CBS is so important - they work hard every day to match the need of every patient and beyond, such as the stem cell registry, to save as many lives as possible. Possible donations of blood and blood products are vital for first responders who can utilize it for the casualties of events like accidents and cardiac incidents. Incidents like these are not good, and you can help by knowing about the information on the CBS website, which is good because it allows people to book a donation appointment, learn more information, and even volunteer with them in order to achieve their future goals.

Their future goals at the CBS are similar to the Emergency Services Association in the sense that as an inclusive non-profit organization dedicated to developing collaborations in the field of emergency services we are strong. Strong leadership skills are good and we are looking for people to effectively communicate ideas from a first principles approach to the people who are interested in the field of emergency services, so complete the form on our website and join us to improve the emergency services.


July 21, 2025

What is the Role of Languages in EMS?

EMS involves working with and providing emergency medical care to various kinds of people with different backgrounds. With different backgrounds, these people come from different countries of origin, meaning that the languages that they grew up speaking are likely non-English languages, such as French, Hindi, Punjabi, Arabic, or Spanish, and this detail has an impact on the ability of different levels of first responders from volunteers to paramedics to communicate with the people requiring emergency medical care in the field. The field work requires the first responders to firstly ensure scene safety, and after doing that the responders need to obtain the consent followed by determining the cause and history of the emergency of the person. The person can be unconscious and without any bystanders nearby, in which case the need to speak and listen to a different language is not needed, however the person may have medical information on them, such as a necklace or a bracelet, which might require the responder to read the information that may be in non-English languages. Languages that the responder does not know may become problematic with conscious people who require EMS. EMS personnel in this case need to obtain consent before determining the mechanism of injury and the history by speaking the language that is familiar to the person in need of medical care, and therefore knowing the local languages in the community is important to provide good EMS care to the people in the community.

The community is an integral part of the Emergency Services Association and the goal of our organization is to improve the education and research in the field of the emergency services by engaging and collaborating with education institutions, such as post-secondary faculties, who seek intrinsic value in our offerings and find value in allocating resources to achieve our common goals. Our common goals and yours can be aligned based on the feedback you share with us by completing the join form on our website, and therefore we look forward to seeing your responses, whether you are interested in police, fire, medical or the military, in order to collaborate and improve the emergency services.


July 28, 2025

What is a Private Ambulance in EMS?

EMS can have a private ambulance that has its core function that is similar to the normal or public ambulance, which is to quickly arrive at the scene of the emergency and properly transport the patient to the hospital in a good way. A good way that the private ambulance can be different from a public ambulance is that the price of the ambulance service is supplied directly by the patient, whereas the price of the ambulance service in the public system is fully or partially supplied by the government, which is facilitated by the citizens who provide the resources to the government in order to ensure a good ambulance service. Service of the ambulance in the private system can work in a way such that the ambulance provider can obtain more money from higher-earning citizens whereas it obtains relatively less money from lower-earning citizens in order to operate and provide its services to the people in a community.

Community service is an important part of the Emergency Services Association, which is an inclusive not-for-profit organization with the goal of improving the education and research in the area of Emergency Services. Services that can benefit from our work include the medical, police, fire, and the military, while the current focus is on the medical services, such as EMS. EMS and other personnel are encouraged to participate in our organization, which can be done by completing the form on our website, in order to improve the emergency services.


August 4, 2025

What is WHMIS in EMS?

EMS has an important component called WHMIS or Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System, which is for people who work around hazardous chemicals, from compressed gasses to fuels or solvents. Fuels or solvents and other chemicals can be unsafe and WHMIS provides information about its hazards, safe usage, emergency protocols and the rights of the workers. The workers can know that WHMIS is based on GHS or the Globally Harmonized System, which was developed by the UN or the United Nations, and this helps to standardize hazard communication worldwide via the use of different WHMIS symbols for compressed gas, corrosive, flammable, oxidizer, explosive, acute toxicity, health hazards, irritants, environmental hazard, and biohazardous infectious materials.

Materials knowledge in the form of emergency first aid measures and other safety protocols are good to know in EMS when treating patients who may be exposed to these hazards, and we at the Emergency Services Association are glad to potentially introduce this area of EMS to you for further exploration. Exploration of education and research in emergency services continues to be a focus of our organization, and we look forward to your participation in our community by completing the join form on our website.


August 12, 2025

What is SFA in EMS?

EMS has a role for SFA or Standard First Aid, which is a standardized first aid training for providing emergency care, and it is often combined with CPR or Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation training in order to form an entry-level certification for EMS and other healthcare related roles. The role of a first aider prioritizes the following goals: preserve life, prevent the worsening of an illness or injury, and promote recovery. The recovery of people with emergencies in the field involves addressing problems that are associated with airway, breathing, circulation, wounds, burns, trauma, poisoning, and mental health. The health of the first aiders that can be negatively affected by helping people in need of emergency care, and the concern of doing harm to another person while helping them are some of the common barriers that are faced by the first aiders. The first aiders also know that by utilizing proper PPE or Personal Protective Equipment they can decrease the chance of harm to themselves, and by obtaining the consent of the person in need of an emergency the first aiders have legal protection under the Good Samaritan Laws as long as they use reasonable skill without exceeding their level skill, are not negligent in what they do, and do not abandon the person while providing them emergency care.

Emergency care is a theme that will be explored in further in the future educational posts at the Emergency Services Association, which is an inclusive organization with the goal of improving knowledge and research in the area of emergency services. The area of emergency services can benefit from your contributions to our organization and we look forward to your participation by completing the join form on our website.


August 17, 2025

What is CPR in EMS?

EMS personnel practice an essential skill called CPR, or Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, which is performed when a person’s heart stops beating or they stop breathing, in order to maintain blood flow and deliver oxygen to vital organs. The procedure combines chest compressions, which circulate blood by pressing firmly and rhythmically on the center of the chest, with rescue breathing, which delivers oxygen to the lungs using a protective barrier such as a CPR mask until the chest rises. CPR is typically performed in cycles of 30 compressions followed by 2 breaths, and the technique varies by age: for adults, compressions are done with two hands; for children, one hand; and for infants, two fingers. Compressions should be about one-third the depth of the chest for each age group and delivered at a rate of 100 to 120 compressions per minute, while the volume of rescue breaths is adjusted for age, with infants requiring only a gentle puff of air to make the chest rise.

When alone, CPR should be started immediately, and the rescuer should call 911 as soon as possible or move the patient to a phone if one is not nearby. When bystanders are present, they should be asked to call 911 and retrieve an AED if available, while the rescuer promptly initiates CPR. The CPR cycle differs depending on the number of rescuers: a single rescuer uses a 30:2 ratio to prioritize continuous blood flow to the heart and brain, since stopping compressions too often for breaths could reduce the chance of survival. When two rescuers are available, the cycle is adjusted to 15 compressions followed by 2 breaths, allowing more frequent ventilations, which is particularly important for children and infants whose cardiac arrest often stems from breathing problems. This approach also lets rescuers alternate roles, maintaining high-quality compressions without excessive fatigue.

CPR should be continued until the person regains consciousness and breathing, 911 personnel arrive and transfer care, or the rescuers are too tired to continue. CPR, when combined with an AED, significantly increases the chances of survival for the person in need of emergency care. AEDs will be the topic of our next educational post at the Emergency Services Association. Our organization will continue to introduce foundational EMS topics from the ground up, and we encourage your participation as we share educational information about other branches of emergency services.

